## DESCRIPTION

The *r3.scatterplot* module takes 3D raster maps and creates a scatter
plot which is a vector map and where individual points in the scatter
plot are vector points. As with any scatter plot the X coordinates of
the points represent values from the first raster map and the Y
coordinates represent values from the second raster map. Consequently,
the vector map is placed in the combined value space of the original
raster maps and its geographic position should be ignored. Typically, it
is necessary to zoom or to change computational in order to view the
scatter plot or to perform further computations on the result.

With the default settings, the *r3.scatterplot* output allows measuring
and querying of the values in the scatter plot. Settings such as
**xscale** or **position** option change the coordinates and make some
of the measurements wrong.

### Multiple variables

If more than two raster maps are provided to the **input** option,
*r3.scatterplot* creates a scatter plot for each unique pair of input
maps. For example, if A, B, C, and D are the inputs, *r3.scatterplot*
creates scatter plots for A and B, A and C, A and D, B and C, B and D,
and finally C and D. Each pair is part of different vector map layer.
*r3.scatterplot* provides textual output which specifies the pairs and
associated layers.

A 3D scatter plot can be generated when the **z\_raster** option is
provided. A third variable is added to each scatter plot and each point
has Z coordinate which represents this third variable.

Each point can also have a color based on an additional variable based
on the values from **color\_raster**. Values from a raster are stored as
categories, i.e. floating point values are truncated to integers, and a
color table based on the input raster color table is assigned to the
vector map.

The **z\_raster** and **color\_raster** can be the same. This can help
with understanding the 3D scatter plot and makes the third variable
visible in 2D as well. When **z\_raster** and **color\_raster** are the
same, total of four variables are associated with one point.

![image-alt](r3_scatterplot_2_variables.png)
![image-alt](r3_scatterplot_2_variables_3rd_color.png)
![image-alt](r3_scatterplot_2_variables_3rd_z.png)

*Figure: One scatter plot of two variables (left), the same scatter plot
but with color showing third variable (middle), again the same scatter
plot in 3D where Z represents a third variable (right).*

![image-alt](r3_scatterplot_2_variables_3rd_z_4th_color.png)
![image-alt](r3_scatterplot_2_variables_3rd_z_4th_color2.png)

*Figure: One scatter plot in with one variable as Z coordinate and
another variable as color (two rotated views).*

### Layout

When working only with variable, X axis represents the first one and Y
axis the second one. With more than one variable, the individual scatter
plots for individual pairs of variables are at the same place. In this
case, the coordinates show the actual values of the variables. Each
scatter plot is placed into a separate layer of the output vector map.

![image-alt](r3_scatterplot_3_variables_3_colors_overlap.png)

*Figure: Three overlapping scatter plots of three variables A, B, and C.
Individual scatter plots are distinguished by color. The colors can be
obtained using `d.vect layer=-1 -c`.*

If visualization is more important than preserving the actual values,
the **-s** flag can be used. This will place the scatter plots next to
each other separated by values provided using **spacing** option.

The layout options can be still combined with additional variables
represented as Z coordinate or color. In that case, Z coordinate or
color is same for all the scatter plots.

![image-alt](r3_scatterplot_3_variables_3_colors.png)

*Figure: Three scatter plots of three variables A, B, and C. First one
is A and B, second A and C, and third B and C.*

![image-alt](r3_scatterplot_3_variables.png)

*Figure: Three scatter plots of three variables A, B, and C with color
showing a fourth variable D in all scatter plots.*

The options **xscale**, **yscale** and **zscale** will cause the values
to be rescaled before they are stored as point coordinates. This is
useful for visualization when one of the variables has significantly
different range than the other or when the scatter plot is shown with
other data and must fit a certain area. The **position** option is used
to place the scatter plot to any given coordinates. Similarly, **-w**
flag can be used to place it to the south-west corner of the computation
region.

## NOTES

The resulting vector will have as many points as there is 3D raster
cells in the current computational region. It might be appropriate to
use coarser resolution for the scatter plot than for the other
computations. However, note that the some values will be skipped which
may lead, e.g. to missing some outliers.

The **color\_raster** input is expected to be categorical raster or have
values which won't loose anything when converted from floating point to
integer. This is because vector categories are used to store the
**color\_raster** values and carry association with the color.

The visualization of the output vector map has potentially the same
issue as visualization of any vector with many points. The points cover
each other and above certain density of points, it is not possible to
compare relative density in the scatter plot. Furthermore, if colors are
associated with the points, the colors of points rendered last are those
which are visible, not actually showing the prevailing color (value).
The modules
*[v.mkgrid](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.mkgrid.html)*
and
*[v.vect.stats](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.vect.stats.html)*
can be used to overcome this issue.

## EXAMPLES

### Example with generated data

Set the computational region for generating data and subsequent
analysis:

```sh
g.region s=0 n=100 w=0 e=100 b=0 t=50 res=10 res3=10 tbres=1 -p3
```

Generate data using raster algebra:

```sh
r3.mapcalc "A = if(depth() < ndepths()/ 2,  row()+col()+depth(), col())" -s
r3.mapcalc "B = if(row() < nrows()/2, rand(0, nrows()) + col() + depth(), depth() + rand(0, nrows()))" -s
r3.mapcalc "C = if(col() < ncols()/3, row() + depth(), rand(0, ncols()))" -s
r3.mapcalc "D = depth()"
```

Create a scatter plot of correlations between A and B. Use C for the Z
axes (height) and D for the color.

```sh
r3.scatterplot input=A,B output=scatterplot z_raster=C color_raster=D
```

![image-alt](r3_scatterplot_2d.png) ![image-alt](r3_scatterplot.png)

*Figure: 2D scatter plot showing third variable as color and 3D scatter
plot showing third variable as color and fourth variable on Z axis which
uncovers another group of values not visible from the 2D scatter plot*

## SEE ALSO

*[r3.stats](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r3.stats.html),
[d.correlate](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/d.correlate.html),
[v.mkgrid](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.mkgrid.html),
[v.vect.stats](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.vect.stats.html),
[g.region](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/g.region.html)*

## AUTHOR

Vaclav Petras, [NCSU GeoForAll
Lab](https://geospatial.ncsu.edu/geoforall/)
